---
title: LIGO Privacy Policy
productVersions:
  dotcom: '*'
redirect_from:
  - /articles/ligo-privacy-policy
---

**Short version:** _LIGO is collaborative project with users and contributors from all over the world, and that collaboration only works when our users are able to work together in good faith. While using the service, You must follow the terms of this section, which include some restrictions on content You can post, conduct on the service, and other limitations. In short, be excellent to each other._

Capitalized terms used but not defined in this Privacy Policy have the meanings assigned to them in our [Terms of Service](https://ADDURL) and [Acceptable Use Policy](https://ADDURL). "You" and "Your" refer to "Customer" or "Users", and "We", "Us", "Our" refer to "LIGO".

### A. Data Collected on the Basis of Consent

**Short version:** *We collect data with Your consent in accordance with this policy.*

Upon Your implied or express consent, we collect a limited amount of data for the purpose of providing Services to You through the Website. Your data is not used for any other purposes, or shared with with third parties, except as set out here or with Your express or implied consent. Your personally identifiable information found in data under our control will be removed upon Your request unless the retention of that data is permitted under applicable laws.

### B. Data Collected on the Basis of Legitimate Interest

**Short version:** *We only collect data required to operate the Website and provide the Services. We don't collect for purposes that are not disclosed to You.*

Based on the legitimate requirements to operate the Services and Website, We collect the following data that may contain personal information or personally identifiable information.

#### 1. Third Party Message Transmission

**Short version:** *If You're concerned about privacy in the transmission of Your messages to Us, review the terms of service and privacy policy of the platform You use to communicate with Us.*

Messages You may send to communicate with Us are not sent through the Website or Services. Messages to Us are sent by other channels and platforms and are subject to separate privacy policies and terms of service unique to those channels and platforms.

#### 2. Statistics

**Short version:** *We use Google Analytics to learn how You are using the Website and Services, but only collect what We need to do this. We don't use this information to advertise or re-market products and services.*

The Website uses Google Analytics, a service which transmits website traffic data to Google servers in the United States and allows Us to observe and identify trends to improve the user experience on our website. Google Analytics processes data that may be considered personally identifiable, such as: the unique User ID set by Google Analytics, the date and time, the title of the page being viewed, the URL of the page being viewed, the URL of the page that was viewed prior to the current page, the screen resolution, the time in local timezone, the files that were clicked on and downloaded, the links clicked on to an outside domain, the type of device, and the country, region, and city. LIGO does not use this information for advertising or re-marketing purposes.

You may opt out of this tracking at any time by activating the “Do Not Track” setting in Your browser, or by clicking this [link](ADDURL) to disable Google Analytics tracking on this Website.

#### 3. Code Stored for Sharing Links

**Short version:** *When You generate a link to share Your code, a copy of the code is stored in Our system so that anyone with the unique link We generate can view the code.*

The Website allows Users to input source code that can be compiled into output code using the Services. Where Users elect to create a unique link to share the source code the User inputs, a copy of this code is saved by LIGO so that it can be retrieved by any party with unique link generated by the Services. This source code is saved indefinitely to allow Users to share and return to the source code at a later time. If You include personal information or personally identifiable information in source code that is shared through the generation of a unique link, a copy of the enclosed personal information or personally identifiable information will be retained indefinitely by LIGO. By inputting source code into the Website and electing to generate a unique link to share the source code, You consent to the indefinite retention of the source code and disclosure of the source code to any person with the unique access link.

#### 4. Code Deployed to Public Blockchain
**Short version:** *When You deploy compiled data to the blockchain, it becomes public and immutable. Don't include personal information in this data.*

Where You input source code into the Website and elect to *"Deploy"* the source code, the compiled output will be deployed onto the publicly accessible Tezos test network, a multi-ledger blockchain outside of LIGO's control. Compiled code deployed to the Tezos test network is accessible to the public and cannot be deleted or otherwise removed. The LIGO Terms of Service prohibit including personal information or personally identifiable information in source code deployed to the public blockchain through the Services. In the event that You deploy source code containing personally information or personally identifiable information, You irrevocably consent to the permanent disclosure of that information to the public and Your behalf, and on behalf of every person whose personal information or personally identifiable information published through the deployment of Your source code.

#### 5. Embedded Content from Other Websites
**Short version:** *Embedded content may be subject to other terms of service and may gather or track Your data or personal information differently. If you're concerned about this, avoid activating this content and tighten up Your browser settings.*

Content on the Website may include embedded content (e.g. videos, charts, etc.). Embedded content from other websites behaves in the exact same way as if the visitor had visited the other website. These websites may collect data about You, use cookies, embed additional third-party tracking, and monitor Your interaction with that embedded content, including tracing Your interaction with the embedded content if You have an account and are logged in to that website. Please refer to the privacy policies and terms of service of embedded content providers for more information about how they use and personal information collected through their services.

### C. Cookie Policy
**Short version:** *We use cookies needed to make the website and services work.*

The Website and Services store cookies on Your device essential to the proper use and functioning of the Website and Services. You may disable these cookies by activating the “Do Not Track” setting in Your browser, however doing so may prevent the Website and Services from functioning at all, or as intended.

### If You do not consent to the terms of this Privacy Policy, do not use the Website or Services.

You can also request that We rectify or erase any personal information or personally identifiable information We hold about You that is within our control. Please send Your request to contact@ligolang.org regarding:

* The right to withdraw consent
* The right of access
* The right to erasure
* The right to rectification
* The right to data portability
* The right to object
* Notification of data breaches
* The right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority


